---
layout: post
title: ""
date: 2019-06-09 19:07:33 +0530
author: tanya
categories: ["Fitness"]
image: "/assets/images/2019/02/muthu-planning.jpg"
excerpt: "I started running marathons in the year 2011 and the initial years were full of running too many miles, often junk. The urge to improve was natural and it was then that I realized that a..."
published: false
wp_id: 6981
comments: true
---

I started running marathons in the
year 2011 and the initial years were full of running too many miles, often junk.
The urge to improve was natural and it was then that I realized that a running
coach was essential. Running was no longer just a hobby or a fitness activity,
but a sport with lofty goals to attain.


The journey since 2016 has been one
of a pursuit of a goal, which is on the bucket list of most marathoners, that
is to qualify for the Boston marathon, the oldest world marathon major. After a
dream run at the Mumbai marathon 2017, improving on my personal best on that
course by an unexpected 20min, I first BQ’d by a margin of 1min 31sec. The
crown of BQ that one yearns for soon starts feeling like one of thorns when
year after year, one is denied entry due to a slower timing.  In the two years that followed, I had
qualified for Boston in four races but wasn’t fast enough to make the cut
during the registration process.   Readjustment
of the qualification criteria to 5min faster timing made it worse with the run
at Chicago (Oct’18) falling short of the new qualification timing by a nasty 44
sec, and there came off the crown.


The thrill of running my first world
major at Chicago was drowned in a feeling of disappointment, despair, anguish
and introspection. What evolved out of all the mind games that ensued in that
intervening period of recovery and a short meeting with coach was a quiet
resolve to give it my best shot at Mumbai. Although a tough course due to its
elevation, the humidity and relatively warmer temperatures, my positive thoughts
persuaded me to recall that run in Jan 2017, when I had exceeded all expectations
by clocking a huge PB to BQ on this very course. I decided to go back to Mumbai
with this resolve and with Ash offering to pace me in this race, I knew this
was my best chance if I could make the most of it.


***The Planning***


A training plan was crafted, keeping
in mind what I lacked in converting potential to performance with focus on
improving the endurance, maintaining pace and effort during the last 10k and
“changing gears”, which meant the ability to increase the effort and pace
towards the crunch stretch of the race. The training plan was designed with a
greater number of long runs, some of them at near race pace, and some of them,
with short surges of running fast followed by slower (race pace) longer
stretches to build up the much-needed lactate threshold. Long intervals at
faster than race pace, with short pause in between helped work on the speed and
also built up capability to run faster on tired legs. Flat and cold Delhi
helped me stick to these target paces. Hydration and fueling with gels and
energy drink-BCAA combo was planned well with running in loops to take them at
regular intervals or run with these in hand. Each of these long runs was done
with a previous day preparation as close to pre-race day feel.


The difficult part of working on the
mind to convert the training efforts to race day results was left to me to
figure out. The best way to move ahead in such tricky situations is to look
back and see how you reached where you have. I went through all the Garmin data
since 2015, the year I had acquired one after having run FMs for 4 years, in
those classic “timeless” days. Most of the improvement in timings had happened
in the second half of the race, with some slowing of first half to save energy.
Over the past 2 years, in the race reports to Ash, what the mind was thinking
at each point in the race was also recorded, which helped visualize the race
and think of solutions. While the initial 8k passes off, fueled by crowd energy
and upto 15k mark in a steady effort often faster than planned, reality of the
course only hits around half way mark when fatigue strikes. Saving energy for
this part of the course, remaining mindful and consciously increasing effort to
stay close to target pace and reaching the Peddar road hill with enough to
spare is the key. The last 6k thereafter, is a segment where mind has to be
alert and let the heart take over to run this last stretch with whatever left
in the tank.


***The execution***


The run up to the race day included
two clear days of rest and acclimatization to the Mumbai weather. A short run
through the tricky last stretch was done on Friday to get the necessary
confidence. Hydration across Friday and Saturday with carb loading was done
religiously. Race day preparation included early morning light top-up of the
usual bread and jam, hydration with electrolyte and BCAA drink till start of
the race, and a 500ml bottle to tide over the initial stretch without wasting
time at water stations. Gels and salt capsules were consumed at usual 35-40min
intervals, except that this time an additional gel between 24-35k mark to
ensure better fueling and not letting it wait till the end, where it might be
too late to refuel. Proper cooling with water and ice-sponge, and running
tangents mindfully under Ash’s guidance helped shorten the course to near exact
distance.


The mental aspect of pre-race
preparation was of a constant reinforcement and self-motivation with thoughts
of a positive outcome. Taking energy from successful training workouts,
watching videos of kipchoge, Mo, and other elites and listening to their
interviews helped build up the tempo. Even a brief halt and a prayer on the
lips in front of Haji Ali and the Babulnath temple during the run on Friday
wasn’t spared, to get whatever divine help one could manage.


Race day was of focus, mind on
target, with a determination to not let it slip by this time. A warm and humid start
to the day played on the mind, but was safely pushed aside as a variable, not
under control so not to be worried about. Plan was to stay mindful all through
the race, not overdo in the initial stretch, and consciously work on the basics
of breathing, form and cadence as the going got tougher. In the stretch of
24k-36k where pace faltered and one gave up in all the previous attempts, aim
was to stay close to target, and push through the pain, in anticipation of
reaching the last lap, where the energy of getting to the finish line would
take me through. Though mind did waver and few stops happened, but the strong
urge to perform and realizing that the next opportunity to make it happen
wasn’t anywhere near, made it a do or die situation and made it easier to pick
up the pace and rush towards the finish line.


It’s an exhilarating feeling, having
achieved the target I trained for after having toiled for more than two years,
hovering around the mark.


***The Debrief***


Looking back at what I did
differently this time, I really wonder. I started planning with a sense of
dejection that led to determination and a silent resolve.  Working under coach’s guidance, the training
was modified to include aspects that addressed the weak links. Lessons were
drawn from the data and notes from the previous race reports. Segments of race
where one gave up were identified and a conscious effort was made to push
through those miles with stronger will. Training paces and mileage built up the
necessary confidence to do so. Mind was exercised in making its own route map
and “*fueling stations*”, where it was
likely to falter and required a stronger push to get through. Mantras which
helped tide over these spots and firm words from the coach whenever I seemed to
be giving up, ensured a quick recovery and faster finish.


***Running provides lessons for life***


These last few years in pursuit of
this elusive target have convinced me about the importance of believing in
oneself and one’s training, learning lessons from the setbacks, putting head
down and going ahead with determination and perseverance. This has given me the
confidence to achieve tougher targets and ability to overcome the challenges not
just in running, but life itself.